Docs > Transforming data (#3103)
OpenRefine/OpenRefine: docs/docs/manual/cellediting.md

### Collapse consecutive whitespace

You may also find that some text cells contain what look like spaces but are actually tabs, or contain multiple spaces in a row. This function will remove all space characters that sit in sequence and replace them with a single space. 

### Unescape HTML 

Your data may come from an HTML-formatted source that expresses some characters through references (such as "&amp;nbsp;" for a space, or "%u0107" for a ć) instead of the actual Unicode characters. You can use the “unescape HTML entities” transform to look for these codes and replace them with the characters they represent. 

### Replace smart quotes with ASCII

Smart quotes (or curly quotes) recognize whether they come at the beginning or end of a string, and will generate an “open” quote (“) and a “close” quote (”). These characters are not ASCII-compliant (though they are UTF8-compliant) so you can use this tranform to replace them with a straight double quote character (") instead. 

### Case transforms

> You can transform an entire column of text into UPPERCASE, lowercase, or Title Case using these three options. This can be useful if you are planning to do textual analysis and wish to avoid case-sensitivity (which many functions are) causing problems in your analysis. 

Reviewer: Note that this isn't "title case" as a librarian or book editor would do it.

### Data-type transforms

> As detailed in [Data types](exploring#data-types), OpenRefine recognizes seven data types: string, number, boolean, date, array, error, and null. When you use these transforms, OpenRefine will check to see if the given values can be converted, then both transform the data in the cells (such as “3” as a text string to “3” as a number) and convert the data type on each successfully transformed cell. Cells that cannot be transformed will output the original value and maintain their original data type. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As detailed in [Data types](exploring#data-types), OpenRefine recognizes five data types: string, number, boolean, date, and array. It also has an internal data type for storing errors. When you use these transforms, OpenRefine will check to see if the given values can be converted, then both transform the data in the cells (such as “3” as a text string to “3” as a number) and convert the data type on each successfully transformed cell. Cells that cannot be transformed will keep the original value and data type. 
```

Author: Apparently we don't want to include "array" in this list either, according to last week's conversation about data types. This whole sentence will be cleaned up.

|today|>|today|
|never|>|never|

This is based on OpenRefine’s ability to recognize dates with the [`toDate()` function](expressions#dates). 

Clicking the “today” cell and editing its data type manually will convert “today” into a value such as “2020-08-14T00:00:00Z”. Attempting the same data-type change on “never” will give you an error message and refuse to proceed.  

Because these common transforms do not offer the ability to output an error instead of the original cell contents, be careful to look for unconverted and untransformed values. You will see a yellow alert at the top of screen that will tell you how many cells were converted - if this number does not match your current row set, you will need to look for and manually correct the remaining cells. 

You can also convert cells into null values or empty strings. This can be useful if you wish to, for example, erase duplicates that you have identified and are analyzing as a subset. 

## Fill down and blank down

Fill down and blank down are two functions most frequently used when encountering data organized into [records](exploring#row-types-rows-vs-records) - that is, multiple rows associated with one specific entity. 

> If you receive information in rows mode and want to convert it to records mode, the easiest way is to sort your first column by the value that you want to use as a unique records key, then blank down all the duplicates in that column. OpenRefine will retain the first unique value and erase the rest. Then you can switch from “Show as rows” to “Show as records” and OpenRefine will convert the data based on the remaining values in the first column. Be careful that your data is sorted properly before you begin blanking down - not just the first column but other columns you may want to have in a certain order. For example, you may have multiple identical entries in the first column, one with a value in the second column and one with an empty cell in the second column. In this case you want the value to come first, so that you can clean up empty rows later, once you blank down. 

Reviewer: A common error here is not using "Make sort permanent," so it's probably worth mentioning.

You can also export the currently identified clusters as a JSON file, or close the window with or without applying your changes. You can also use the histograms on the right to narrow down to, for example, clusters with lots of matching rows, or clusters of long or short values. 

### Clustering methods

You don’t need to understand the details behind each clustering method to apply them successfully to your data. The order in which these methods are presented in the interface and on this page is the order we recommend - starting with the most strict rules and moving to the most lax, which require more human supervision to apply correctly. 

The clustering pop-up window offers you a variety of clustering methods:

*   key collision
    *   fingerprint
    *   ngram-fingerprint
    *   metaphone3
    *   cologne-phonetic
    *   Daitch-Mokotoff
    *   Beider-Morse
*   nearest neighbor
    *   levenshtein
    *   ppm

**Key collisions** are very fast and can process millions of cells in seconds:

> **Fingerprinting** is the least likely to produce false positives, so it’s a good place to start. It does the same kind of data-cleaning behind the scenes that you might think to do manually: fix whitespace into single spaces, put all uppercase letters into lowercase, discard punctuation, convert special characters to their ASCII equivalent, split all strings (words) and reorganize them alphabetically (so “Zhenyi, Wang” becomes “Wang Zhenyi”). This makes comparing those types of name values very easy.

Author: I'm not sure "diacritics" is much better than "ASCII" but you're right; I'll work on it.

> **N-gram fingerprinting** allows you to set the _n_ value to whatever number you’d like, and will create n-grams of _n_ size (after doing some cleaning), alphabetize them, then join them back together into a _fingerprint_. For example, a 1-gram fingerprint will simply organize all the letters in the cell into alphabetical order - by creating grams with one character length. A 2-gram fingerprint will find all the two-character grams, remove duplicates, alphabetize them, and join them back together. This can help match cells that have typos, or incorrect spaces (such as matching “lookout” and “look out,” which fingerprinting itself won’t identify). The higher the _n_ value, the fewer clusters will be identified. With 1-grams, keep an eye out for mismatched values that are near-anagrams of each other (such as “Wellington” and “Elgin Town”). 

Author: No, it appears to be just a word in my head! 

New version: 

> **N-gram fingerprinting** allows you to set the _n_ value to whatever number you’d like, and will create n-grams of _n_ size (after doing some cleaning), alphabetize them, then join them back together into a _fingerprint_. For example, a 1-gram fingerprint will simply organize all the letters in the cell into alphabetical order - by creating segments one character in length. A 2-gram fingerprint will find all the two-character segments, remove duplicates, alphabetize them, and join them back together (for example, “banana” generates “ba an na an na,” which becomes “anbana”). This can help match cells that have typos, or incorrect spaces (such as matching “lookout” and “look out,” which fingerprinting itself won’t identify). The higher the _n_ value, the fewer clusters will be identified. With 1-grams, keep an eye out for mismatched values that are near-anagrams of each other (such as “Wellington” and “Elgin Town”).

**Daitch-Mokotoff** is a phonetic algorithm for Slavic and Yiddish words, especially names. **Baider-Morse** is a version of Daitch-Mokotoff that is slightly more strict. 

Regardless of the language of your data, applying each of them might find different potential matches: for example, Metaphone clusters “Cornwall” and “Corn Hill” and “Green Hill,” while Cologne clusters “Greenvale” and “Granville” and “Cornwall” and “Green Wall.” 

**Nearest neighbor **clustering methods are slower than key collision methods. They allow the user to set a radius - a threshold for matching or not matching. OpenRefine uses a “blocking” method first, which sorts values based on whether they have a certain amount of similarity (the default is “6” for a six-character string of identical characters) and then runs the nearest-neighbor operations on those sorted groups. We recommend setting the block number to at least three, and then increasing it if you need to be more strict (for example, if every value with “river” is being matched, you should increase it to 6 or more). Increasing the radius will make the matches more lax, as bigger differences will be clustered:

> **Levenshtein distance** counts the number of operations required to make one value perfectly match another. As in the key collision methods above, it will do things like change uppercase to lowercase, fix whitespace, change special characters, etc. Each character that gets changed counts as 1 “distance.” “New York” and “newyork” have an edit distance value of 3 (“N” to “n”, “Y” to “y,” remove the space). It can do relatively advanced operations, such as understand the distance between “M. Makeba” and “Miriam Makeba” (5), but it may create false positives if these distances are greater than other, simpler transformations (such as the one-character distance to “B. Makeba,” another person entirely).

Author: "Edits" it is! I don't think it needs a link but if you have one or two to suggest I'd like to see them.
